---
title: "pbrt over the Years"
source: "https://pbr-book.org/4ed/Retrospective_and_the_Future/pbrt_over_the_Years"
author:
published:
created: 2026-04-11
description:
tags:
  - "clippings"
---
## 16.1 pbrt over the Years
> ## 16.1 pbrt 的历年发展

Over four editions of this book and the four versions of pbrt that have accompanied them, much has changed: while path tracing has been present since the start, it was not the default integration technique until the third edition. Furthermore, the first two editions devoted many pages to techniques like irradiance caching that reuse indirect lighting computation across nearby points in order to reduce rendering time. All of those techniques but for photon mapping are gone now, as sampling algorithms have improved and computers have become much faster, making path tracing and related approaches the most appropriate focus today.
> 在本书的四个版本以及随之而来的四个 pbrt 版本中，许多东西都发生了变化：虽然路径追踪从一开始就存在，但直到第三版才成为默认积分技术。此外，前两版用了大量篇幅介绍辐照度缓存等技术，这些技术在相邻点之间复用间接光照计算以减少渲染时间。除了光子映射之外，所有这些技术现在都已被移除，因为采样算法已经改进，计算机也变得更快，使得路径追踪和相关方法成为当今最合适的关注点。

There have been numerous improvements throughout the system over time—we have adopted more effective algorithms as they have been developed and as we ourselves have learned more about how to write a good renderer; notably, the techniques used for generating sampling patterns and for importance sampling BSDFs and light sources are substantially better now than they were at the start. Those improvements have brought added complexity: pbrt-v1, the first version of the system, was roughly 20,000 lines of code, excluding tabularized data and automatically generated source files for parsing. This version is just over 60,000 lines of code measured the same way, though some of the increase is due to the addition of a variety of new features, like subsurface scattering, volumetric light transport, the RealisticCamera, and the [Curve](https://pbr-book.org/4ed/Shapes/Curves.html#Curve) and [BilinearPatch](https://pbr-book.org/4ed/Shapes/Bilinear_Patches.html#BilinearPatch) shapes.

Through all the improvements to the underlying algorithms, the bones of the system have not changed very much— Integrator s have always been at the core of solving the light transport equation, and many of the core interface types like Shape s, Light s, Camera s, Filter s, and Sampler s have all been there throughout with the same responsibilities, though there have been changes to their interfaces and operation along the way. Looking back at pbrt-v1 now, we can find plenty of snippets of code that are still present, unchanged since the start.

To quantify the algorithmic improvements to pbrt, we resurrected pbrt-v1 and compared it to the version of pbrt described in this book, rendering the scene shown in Figure [16.1](#fig:tt-pbrt-v1-v4). The latest version of pbrt takes longer than pbrt-v1 to render this scene using path tracing, but mean squared error (MSE) with respect to reference images is improved by over. The net is a improvement in Monte Carlo efficiency purely due to algorithmic improvements.

Figure 16.1: Audi TT Car Model Lit by an Environment Map. (a) Reference image, rendered with pbrt-v1 with 64k samples per pixel. (b) Rendered with pbrt-v1 with 16 samples per pixel. (c) Reference image, rendered with pbrt-v4 with 64k samples per pixel. (d) Rendered with pbrt-v4 with 16 samples per pixel. (Some image differences due to changes in material models since pbrt-v1 are expected.) The reduction in noise from (b) to (d) is notable; all of it is due to improvements in sampling and Monte Carlo integration algorithms over pbrt ’s lifetime. *(Car model courtesy of Marko Dabrovic and Mihovil Odak.)*

The changes in computers’ computational capabilities since pbrt-v1 have had even more of an impact on rendering performance. Much of the early development of pbrt in the late 1990s was on laptop computers that had a single-core 366 MHz Pentium II CPU. Some of the development of the latest version has been on a system that has 32 CPU cores, each one running at ten times the clock rate, 3.7 GHz.

A tenfold increase in processor clock speed does not tell the whole story about a CPU core’s performance: there have been many microarchitectural improvements over the years such as better branch predictors, more aggressive out-of-order execution, and multi-issue pipelines. Caches have grown larger and compilers have improved as well. Data gathered by Rupp ([2020](https://pbr-book.org/4ed/Retrospective_and_the_Future/Further_Reading.html#cite:Rupp2020)) provides one measure of the aggregate improvement: from 1999 to late 2019, single-thread CPU performance as measured by the SPECInt benchmark ([Standard Performance Evaluation Corporation 2006](https://pbr-book.org/4ed/Retrospective_and_the_Future/Further_Reading.html#cite:Spec06)) has improved by over. Though SPECInt and pbrt are not the same, we still estimate that, between improvements in single-thread performance and having more cores available, the overall difference in performance between the two computers is well over a factor of 1,000.

The impact of a speedup is immense. It means that what took an hour to render on that laptop we can now render in around three seconds. Conversely, a painfully slow hour-long rendering computation on the 32-core system today would take an intolerable 42 days on the laptop. Lest the reader feel sympathy for our having suffered with such slow hardware at the start, consider the IBM 4341 that Kajiya used for the first path-traced images: its floating-point performance was roughly slower than that of our laptop’s CPU: around 0.2 MFLOPS for the 4341 ([Dongarra 1984](https://pbr-book.org/4ed/Retrospective_and_the_Future/Further_Reading.html#cite:Dongarra1984)) versus around 50 for the Pentium II ([Longbottom 2017](https://pbr-book.org/4ed/Retrospective_and_the_Future/Further_Reading.html#cite:Longbottom2017)). If we consider ray tracing on the GPU, where pbrt is generally 10–20 faster than on the 32-core CPU, we could estimate that we are now able to path trace images around faster than Kajiya could—in other words, that pbrt on the GPU today can render in roughly ten seconds what his computer could do over the course of a year.